1:Sindermann et al.

political attitudes. Accordingly, findings on whether or not a lower degree of heterogeneity of one’s (political) information environment more broadly (not focusing specifically on social media) is associated with polarization and/or more extreme political attitudes remain inconclusive. It clearly seems important then to investigate the degree of heterogeneity of political information environments and associations with political attitudes across different news sources. In a related area, a study from Germany found that a group of individuals who stated they would not vote if general elections were held the following Sunday showed the lowest number of different news sources consumed across offline and online media types. This group was closely followed by the groups of individuals who had the intention of voting for the Alternative für Deutschland (AfD), which represents a populist right-wing party (Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung, 2017; Schleunes et al., 2020; Volkens et al., 2020) or for “other” smaller parties (Sindermann et al., 2020). Potential voters of DIE LINKE (the left-wing German party), which can be deemed the most extreme left of the major German parties (Volkens et al., 2020), reported the highest number of different news sources consumed (Sindermann et al., 2020). This indicates that the lowest heterogeneity of political information environments is linked to individuals intending to abstain from voting, or to vote for the AfD or for “other” smaller parties; although it must be noted that the sample of the previous study was not representative of the general German population and that heterogeneity in news consumption was not directly assessed.

Summary and aims of the present study

In summary, there is an ongoing discussion on whether and to what extent homogeneous information environments exist. The present study aimed to contribute to this discussion by providing empirical data on the information environments of individuals in relation to political news by applying a dimensional approach. In comparison to many previous studies, we took into account various online and offline media types. The present study also aimed to examine individual differences in sociodemographic variables and personality in association with the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment. We expected age (positively), gender (higher in men), educational level (positively), and Openness (positively) to be associated with a higher degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment. Finally, we aimed to investigate associations between the degree of heterogeneity of political information environments with ideological and political attitudes. RWA and SDO were expected to be negatively associated with the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment. We also expected lower heterogeneity of political information environments for the groups of individuals indicating they would not vote, vote for the AfD, or for “other” smaller parties.

Method

Procedure

The present study, including sample size calculations (see also Supplementary Material), procedure, measures, and statistical analyses, was preregistered. Data and the data analysis
new media & society 26(2)

Two independent samples were recruited for the present research using two online surveys.
page2:# new media & society

2024, Vol. 26(2) 711–731

The degree of heterogeneity of news consumption in Germany—Descriptive statistics and relations with individual differences in personality, ideological attitudes, and voting intentions

Cornelia Sindermann, Christopher Kannen and Christian Montag

Ulm University, Germany

Abstract

This study aimed to examine the degree of homogeneity versus heterogeneity of individuals’ political information environments across offline and online media types and relations with sociodemographic variables, personality, and political attitudes. In two online surveys, German participants (sample 1: N = 686; sample 2: N = 702) provided information on sociodemographic variables, consumption of political news, and voting intentions, and completed the Big Five Inventory and Right-Wing Authoritarianism (RWA) and Social Dominance Orientation (SDO) scales. Results revealed that absolutely homogeneous political news consumption was evident for a small proportion of individuals (2.04% and 0.43%). Openness (positively) and Agreeableness (negatively) exhibited significant associations with the degree of heterogeneity of political information environments across samples. No consistent patterns of relations with either the ideological attitudes of RWA and SDO or voting intentions were observed. The findings shed light on the existence of absolutely homogeneous political information environments and “who” might be prone to a more homogeneous versus more heterogeneous information environment.

Corresponding author:

Cornelia Sindermann, Institute of Psychology and Education, Ulm University, Helmholtzstraße 8/1, Ulm 89081, Germany.

Email: cornelia.sindermann@uni-ulm.de
new media & society 26(2)

Keywords

Echo chamber, filter bubble, homogeneous information environment, ideological attitudes, news consumption, personality, political news, voting

Introduction

So-called filter bubbles and echo chambers generate much discussion in the mass media and scientific literature.
page3:# Sindermann et al.

In this direction—an add-on is, however, always limited to the online context (see examples mentioned in Bozdag and van den Hoven (2015)).

Across all media types used, only a few individuals responded “never” to seeing news contradicting their existing opinions when consuming political news (n = 14, 2.04% in sample 1; n = 3, 0.43% in sample 2). These results indicate that few individuals are exposed to absolutely homogeneous information environments across media types. This is in line with previous research on incidental and counter-attitudinal news exposure on different media types (Newman et al., 2017; Vaccari et al., 2016).

Older age and being male (versus female) were associated with greater heterogeneity of one’s political information environment across samples. These results fit with findings from previous studies (Benesch, 2012; Sindermann et al., 2020) although, in one of the cited studies significant associations with education were also found, which was only observed in one of our samples (sample 1).

With respect to individual differences in personality the following results were obtained: Significant positive associations of Openness (in correlational and regression analyses) and negative associations of Agreeableness (in regression analyses) with the degree of heterogeneity of political information environments were found across samples.

We want to specifically highlight the positive associations between Openness and the degree of heterogeneity of political information environments. These positive associations are in line with our initial hypothesis and the findings of previous studies (Matz, 2021; Sindermann et al., 2020). Moreover, it supports the intellectual stimulation hypothesis proposed by Kim and Kim (2018). Individuals scoring high in Openness seem to enjoy engagement in news reports dealing with a range of different political opinions. This is also in line with one study where a positive association between Openness and engagement in political discussions was reported (Mondak and Halperin, 2008); but we should also acknowledge the results of other studies that do not support this link (Gerber et al., 2012; Hibbing et al., 2011). As can be seen in Supplementary Table 5, Openness might be more strongly related to the degree of heterogeneity of one’s online versus offline political information environment (see results from sample 1 reported in the Supplementary Material). A greater potential for the individual to create his or her online news environment versus the offline news environment might contribute to these differential associations (see Supplementary Material).

Contrary to our hypotheses, we did not find any significant association of ideological attitudes with the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment across samples. Despite RWA and SDO having been found to positively relate to closed-mindedness (Berggren et al., 2019), they do not seem to be related to the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment. Interestingly, however, additional analyses (Supplementary Material) revealed that RWA was negatively related to the heterogeneity of one’s online, but not offline, political information environment across both samples. On the one hand, it is possible that high-choice online environments in particular offer the possibility for homogeneous political news consumption for individuals high in RWA. On the other hand, more information filtering online (e.g. via algorithms) compared to offline sources might influence RWA. These results and the causal direction of associations will need to be (re-)investigated in future studies.
# new media & society 26(2)

It is difficult to draw any firm conclusions regarding potential associations between the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment and voting intentions.
page4:# new media & society 26(2)

It is difficult to draw any firm conclusions regarding potential associations between the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment and voting intentions. Lower heterogeneity was not associated with intentions of not voting, or to vote for a more extreme right-wing party, across samples. Models derived from linear discriminant analysis on associations of sociodemographic variables and the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment with voting intentions revealed quite low classification accuracies. Therefore, we should not overinterpret these particular findings. Future studies might want to examine the associations between the degree of heterogeneity of political information environments and political attitudes in German samples in a slightly different way. For example, one could investigate the strength of party support, topic polarization, affective/partisan polarization via the “feeling thermometer,” or overall left–right ideological self-placement (e.g. Heatherly et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2014). Based on this idea, on an exploratory basis, we calculated the correlation between a 10-point left–right ideological self-placement item and the HoHe score in sample 2 (the left–right self-placement was only assessed in sample 2). The association was nonsignificant (ρ = –.02, p = .660). However, the association between an extremity score (absolute difference between self-placement on the left-right dimension and the mean scores 5 and 6) and the HoHe score was small but significant (ρ = .08, p = .037; these analyses were not preregistered). This indicates that these associations should be investigated in more depth in further studies to understand these complex relations.

Some limitations of the present study must be acknowledged. First of all, neither of the two samples is completely representative of the general German population. Moreover, it is important that the generalizability of the findings will be tested in future studies in other countries. Nevertheless, we are confident that the results that were replicated across the two samples of the present study will also be found in other samples. Next, it should be emphasized that data collection for both surveys was conducted in times of an exceptional crisis, namely, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, many news stories across different platforms are likely to have included information about the virus and legal/policy regulations to combat it (e.g. lockdowns, stay-at-home orders, etc.; GöfaK Medienforschung, 2020, as cited in Statista, 2021; tagesschau.de, 2020). The focus on these topics across news platforms might adversely affect the generalizability of findings and might explain findings that were inconsistent with our hypotheses. For instance, according to a recent survey, voters of the AfD were mostly against the measures to fight the COVID-19 pandemic (Forschungsgruppe Wahlen, 2020), which might (in part) explain high HoHe scores in this group. The present study should therefore be replicated when topics related to the pandemic are not dominating the news. Another limitation is that the present surveys were cross-sectional. Any conclusions about causality are limited, accordingly. One might, however, cautiously infer causal influences on the degree of heterogeneity of one’s political information environment specifically for associations with sociodemographic variables and personality traits, which are generally seen as relatively stable (Costa and McCrae, 1992a; Edmonds et al., 2008; Roberts and Mroczek, 2008). Another limitation is the application of self-report measures. Assessment of personality, ideological attitudes, and voting intentions via self-reports might be influenced by response biases or lack of ability for introspection (McDonald, 2008). Also, the statements on how many news sources one consumed
Within the past six months prior to participation, and on how often one was confronted with counter-attitudinal news, might be (un-)consciously biased.